Write three concise paragraphs (total ~1-1.5 pages double-spaced) in response to John Rawls’ article “Two Concepts of Rules.” 

In the first paragraph **_explain_** the analogy between practices like promising or punishment and the game of baseball. 

In the second paragraph, _**raise a potential objection**_ to Rawls’ use of this analogy (i.e. consider how practices like promising and punishment might differ from games or sports like baseball, in a way that affects Rawls’ argument).

In the third paragraph, say _**whether the objection hits the target**_, or whether Rawls has a compelling reply.
___
Rawls' intention with the baseball analogy is to illustrate how under the Practice Conception, the rules of a practice are logically prior to considerations in particular instances. While you may swing a bat and miss thrice, you cannot "strike out" unless you consider yourself to be playing a game of baseball. Conversely, when you *do* find yourself playing baseball, the *rule* of striking out dictates that you get three strikes. It would be nonsensical to request a fourth pitch after three strikes, provided you were asking about *this* at-bat and not critiquing the strike rule in general. It is simply not a part of the game of baseball to consider whether the rules apply in particular instances. Promises are like baseball, according to Rawls. We play "promising," where one of the rules dictates that when you make a promise, you follow through on it. Just like striking out, it is nonsensical to consider whether one can break the promise on this particular occasion. Those that do are either joking or don't understand how the game "promising" is played.

One objection to Rawls' use of this analogy is the fact that the "promising" game's rulebook is not public knowledge. The Major League Baseball association publishes an exacting specification of the rules of baseball ([link for the curious](https://img.mlbstatic.com/mlb-images/image/upload/mlb/atcjzj9j7wrgvsm8wnjq.pdf)). Baseball is also a practice we enter into voluntarily and for recreational purposes. Thus it is both agreeable and necessary that we have a reference for the rules of the practice. By contrast, the "promising" game is mired in the complexities of real-life decisions. No one learns the promising game by reading a universally accessible rulebook, but rather through a set of life experiences unique to that individual. Furthermore, the possible exceptions for following through on a promise are too many to count, and we cannot hope that everyone will agree on them exactly. If you and I disagree on whether a certain promise is to be kept, any accusation of mine that you "do not understand what promising is" sounds absurd. In his baseball analogy Rawls paints an unrealistic picture of how complex moral practices like promising ought to operate.

To this objection, Rawls would reply that moral rules like promising are still institutionally established, whether or not the institution is as explicit as the Major League Baseball association. Moreover, debate about the rules within the practice *is* possible, much like one might petition to change the number of strikes in baseball. Just because promising is more complex than striking out does not imply that we should give up hope on grasping it as an institutional practice. In the majority of cases the rules of promising are clear -- namely, that you follow through on what you promised. We do admit there are exceptions, as in the case where you abandon your airport shuttle duties after coming down with COVID-19. However, these exceptions are either well understood within the practice, or else able to be debated and revised by the institution as new scenarios (like COVID-19) come up. The rules in the baseball practice are subject to revision in much the same way, so the analogy is defensible.