#PHIL181 #philosophy #reaction #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 
*Prompt*: How does Grice’s task here connect with his task in “Meaning”? The piece is framed by what Grice regards as a case of dubious philosophical methodology: arguing from differences in the _use_ of logical connectives and their English counterparts to a difference in their _literal meaning_. On Grice’s theory of cooperative constraints on conversation, how can we determine whether two expressions have the same literal meaning? Study Grice’s accounts of particular examples of what he considers “conversational implicatures”, including cases of metaphor and irony. Are his “deductions” plausible reconstructions of how hearers actually figure out what speakers are getting at?
___
In both "Meaning" and "Logic and Conversation," Grice uses the same insight about conventional communicative actions to clear up puzzles in the philosophy of meaning. This insight is the fact that communication is rational, end-directed behavior where speaker and audience work towards shared goals under a shared set of cooperative assumptions. In "Logic and Conversation" he has a name for this -- the "Cooperative Principle" (though Grice's articulation of communication is more complex than just the Cooperative Principle itself, I will use it here as substitute for brevity). In "Meaning," Grice uses something like the Cooperative Principle to provide an account of nonnatural meaning, which is intending to induce a belief in an audience, which is induced by means of the audience's recognition of the intention. In "Logic and Conversation," Grice uses the same conceptual toolkit to give what I see to be a more generic account of conversational implicature; that is, how one can say *p* and implicate *q*. I think nonnatural meaning is a type of conversational implicature where what is imparted is a belief for the audience to assume. At least, it's clear that the two relate, though I'm not sure how they would be umbrella'd under the same theory if at all, or if they're intended to be the same thing. The conditions for each occurring, particularly the clause acout the audience's recognition of the speaker's intention, seem highly related.