#PHIL181 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #reading-reaction 
*Prompt*: Kripkenstein (Kripke’s tentative reconstruction of the _Philosophical Investigations_ Wittgenstein) argues that there are no facts about a speaker that can constitute their literally meaning any one particular thing with a word. Get clear about exactly what Kripkenstein is arguing _against_, and try to get clear about the offered replacement--a theory of meaning that has to do with “assertibility conditions” rather than truth-conditions. Ask yourself: does Kripkenstein think that there is something that can constitute a speaker’s using a word with particular assertibility conditions? If so, how do assertibility conditions escape the argument against truth conditions? If not, what is Kripkenstein’s position?
___
In the "On Rules and Private Language" excerpt, Kripke reconstructs Wittgenstein's *Philosophical Investigations* argument as saying something about the impossibility of private language. More specifically, this is a kind of failure of private *rule following* with respect to language. We cannot analyze an individual following a given (linguistic) rule given just facts about the individual and this particular instance. Instead, we require reference to that individual's membership in a community for the rule-following to be understood.

Put this way, I understand Kripkenstein to be arguing against any ideas that *meaning* might be secured through individual uses of language without greater context, as in the case where I say "1 plus 2 is 3" and take myself to be *meaning* the addition function with my use of 'plus.' Kripke employs Wittgenstein's skepticism about future usage to convince us that there is no way of telling whether I meant 'plus' or 'quus,' considering facts about me. We have to look more broadly at the "categorical assertion" that a given individual follows a given rule, and this requires adopting a theory of meaning to do with *assertibility* rather than *truth*. I am trying to get clear on the connection between assertibility and the role of community in fixing meaning.