In this reaction I'll discuss Russell's "Gray's Elegy" argument and how it contributes to his theory of denoting phrases.

Russell invokes his point about Gray's Elegy in the latter half of his paper "On Denoting," when he is looking to distinguish the *meaning* of a denoting phrase from its denotation. It seems to me that the central problem Russell seeks to solve here is one about *access*. We previously discussed how Russell's denoting complexes are "redirection devices," meaning they function to make propositions they occur within to be *about* things other than themselves. How, precisely, does this function? How does a denoting phrase contribute meaning to a proposition independently of its denotation?

Take the denoting phrase which Russell uses in his argument, "the first line of Gray's Elegy." Any proposition utilizing this denoting phrase has *aboutness* only concerning the *denotation* of "the first line of Gray's Elegy," which is "the curfew tolls the knell of parting day." Thus "the meaning of '[the first line of Gray's elegy]'" (the meaning of the denoting complex) becomes "the meaning of 'the curfew tolls the knell of parting day,'" which is not what we wanted when we asked for the meaning of the denoting complex itself. So, it becomes impossible for us to assert propositions about the denoting complex *itself*, because the *aboutness* we're after when we assert about denoting complex sort of sneaks away via this manner of redirection.

There is a solution, but not an elegant one, in that we can denote a denoting complex using a "higher order" denoting complex, such as "'[the denoting complex expressed in English by "the red planet"]' is in fact a denoting complex." This seems cumbersome, as it seems English speakers are capable of understanding "the red planet" without indirectly routed propositions like this one.