*In studying Frege's argument for his multi-level conception of linguistic meaning, try to keep track of the connections Frege relies on between meaning and "epistemological" concepts like "understand", "believe", "know", "a priori", "substantive". At the same time, keep track of his reliance on concepts to do with how language "corresponds" to the word---concepts like "truth" and "reference (nominatum)". Is his focus, in the theory of meaning, on truth (descriptive accuracy) to the exclusion of such other things as emotional content, cognitive associations, and so on, arbitrary, or can it be defended as central in some deep sense?*
___
I think that, plainly, in his first paragraph Frege is attempting to articulate why "Sameness" (or "identity") is interesting as a relation between names in a way it is not as a relation between objects. Asserting Sameness of the former sense requires more than *a priori* justification, while in the latter sense it does not. In coming to know $a = b$, we add something valuable to our knowledge *about the world* -- for example, knowledge that Clark Kent is actually Superman. This is strange, because $a = b$ looks at first like only a relation between names. Yet is the reference (nominatum) of these two names -- the fact that these names refer to the same object -- that makes such relations meaningful, or as Frege says, "very valuable extensions of our knowledge" (186).

But how can names actually contribute to our knowledge in this way? After all, Frege says that names are arbitrary. You can take some sequence of syllables or squiggles on paper to signify any object you like. I can take "foo" and "bar" to both be names for my pencil, yet when I say "foo = bar" it doesn't seem like I contribute *genuine knowledge* -- I'm just expressing a consequence of the strange naming scheme I've adopted for the contents of my backpack. So identity statements between names must be interesting for some other reason. Frege suggests that some names have a *role* ("sense") to play in the way they refer to objects, which is distinct from the fact of their naming or referring to the object. Names present the objects they stand for in a particular way, such that the Sameness of names $a$ and $b$ -- Clark Kent and Superman, or Hesperus and Phosphorus -- constitutes knowledge about the world.