#PHIL181 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 
It seems to me that Russell shares Frege's view that the "aboutness" of a (propositional) sentence concerns its truth or falsity, determined by its contents and their relation to the world. In Professor Crimmins' words from last lecture, sentences are "live questions about how the world really is."

To me, a contribution of Russell's theory in "On Denoting" is the relaxation of Frege's firm realism constraints that we causing issues in the edge cases of his theory. Specifically, Russell is concerned with Frege's denoting phrases in the cases where the denotation is absent -- sentences like "The present king of France is bald." or "Unicorns have only one horn." come to mind. Frege's theory seems hitched onto the idea that the *denotation* (the present king of France; unicorns) ultimately determines the contents of propositions containing denoting phrases. This commits him to a strange -- and in Russell's view, "artificial" (484) -- realist escape clause in which denoting phrases default in cases where their denotations are otherwise absent. Thus "The present king of France" or "unicorns" denote $\varnothing$.

Further, this absent denotation case crops up as an issue with the law of excluded middle. Via the law of excluded middle, the present king of France must be either bald or not bald -- i.e., one of "The present king of France is bald." and "The present king of France is *not* bald." must be true. The former sentence is more clearly false, but if this is to make the latter sentence (its negation) true, in what way is this so?

Russell's solution is to modify this theory in the case of denoting phrases, like "the present king of France." Instead of necessarily picking out referents in the world, these phrases should be viewed as identifying a set of quantified propositional functions. This translation strips denoting phrases of their meaning all in themselves, yet still provides a meaning to any propositional statement in which they occur. Under Russell's construction, the sentence "I met a man" becomes "'I met $x$, and $x$ is human' is not always false." Thus "a man" is made "wholly destitute of meaning" (481), yet the whole sentence itself still manages to mean something. Likewise, "The current king of France is not bald." becomes true in the case that it means "It is false that there is an entity which is now King of France and is bald." Thus, Russell maintains the correspondance with the world that made Frege's theory attractive, while stripping out the sketchy epistemological territory that came associated with it in the cases of absent denotations.