#essay #PHIL181 #philosophy 
*Prompt*: Clarify and evaluate either Russell's chief objection to Meinong (to do with the law of non-contradiction) or one of his objections to Frege (e.g., the Grey's Elegy argument or the argument from nondenoting descriptions in the consequents of true conditionals -- "If Ferdinand is not drowned, Ferdinand is my only son").
*Word Count*: ~1500
___
# Abstract
In his 1905 paper "On Denoting," Bertrand Russell propses a theory of denoting phrases that he considers an improvement to earlier theories by philosophers Alexius Meinong and Gottlob Frege. Specifically, Russell is responding to Meinong's article in *Untersuchungen zur Gegemtandstheorie und Psychologic,* published a year prior in 1904. Their disagreement principally involves a disagreement over what denoting phrases *stand for* -- that is, whether such phrases contribute *genuine objects* to the meanings of sentences in which they occur. Meinong thinks this is so, and this leads him to conclusions that Russell objects to in "On Denoting" and elsewhere.

This essay will be divided into three parts; in the first part I will articulate Meinong's position on denoting phrases as best I can. In the following part I will explain Russell's chief objection to Meinong's theory, and comment on how Russell's own proposal manages to evade the objection. Finally, I will evaluate how well I think Russell's objection is justified.

# What is Meinong's position?
Meinong's position on denoting phrases must be understood in the larger context of his *Gegenstandstheorie*, a philosophical theory concerning the properties and kinds of objects. Meinong divides objects into three classes: those which exist (and have being), those which subsist (and have subsistence), and those which neither exist nor subsist. Tables and chairs exist, while abstract objects like the number 2 are given subsistence but not existence (being) under this theory. Meinong postulates further that impossible objects, such as the round square, as well as false propositions fall into this third category of objects without being or subsistence.

To talk about impossible objects in a precise way, Meinong's theory distinguishes between what Russell calls "thetic" and "synthetic" judgements^[[[Russell Review of Meinong 1905.pdf]], 531]. Thetic judgements assert an objects' existence, while synthetic judgements assert or assign properties to objects. Thus the round square is both round and square (a synthetic judgement) even though the round square does not exist or even subsist (a thetic judgement). As Meinong's colleagues, Mally and Ameseder, explain, synthetic judgements about impossible objects are allowed to assert necessary and yet contradictory things, such as the round square's (synthetically) being both round and square.

Meinong also shares Frege's Object view that within a proposition, definite descriptions contribute the objects they stand for as their content. Together with his *Gegenstandstheorie*, Meinong's position has some nice advantages. For one, negative existentials like "The present king of France does not exist" are trivial to handle -- the object contributed simply doesn't exist. Moreover, the correspondence between language and the world persists nicely even as we talk about fictional or nonexistent objects. Our definite description "the Greek god of thunder" is actually just talk *about* Zeus, the genuine object that does not exist yet subsists.

# What is Russell's chief objection to Meinong?
In "On Denoting," Russell mentions quickly that he rejects Meinong's view on definite descriptions because it infringes upon the law of non-contradiction^[[[Russell On Denoting.pdf]], 483]. Meinong's theory of denoting phrases allows for both the sentences "The round square is round." and "The round square is square (meaning: not round)." to be true, in violation of the law of the excluded middle. Further, we can run into problems concerning existence, because if the round square is round and square, the existent round square is existent, round and square. In both cases Russell is employing Meinongian synthetic judgements, asserting "being-so" or "*Sosein*," that necessarily characterize the objects as having the properties that describe them^[[[Russell Review of Meinong 1905.pdf]], 531]^[https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/meinong/].

Yet, of course, the existent round square does not exist, because nothing is both round and square, meaning the object is impossible. So we have that the existent round square both does and does not exist. Russell even points out that we might be drawn into ontological arguments by this view, in which the denoting phrase "the existent God" must denote an entity that both exists and is God, though this point is not central to his objection.

Russell believes the reason for Meinong's error lies in conflating *grammatical* form with *logical* form in the case of subject-predicate sentences. The two sentences "The present queen of England is bald" and "The present king of France is bald," for example, are of the same grammatical form. Each has linguistic objects serving as subjects and predicates, such that each sentence (grammatically) means that the subject is assigned the predicate. Where Meinong fails, according to Russell, is in failing to note the difference in logical form between these two sentences. Namely, in the former case the subject being assigned the predicate *exists*, whereas it does not in the latter case. There is a current queen of England but no current king of France. When we ignore this fact, as Meinong does, we think that every grammatically correct subject-predicate sentence has *something* in the object position, logically speaking. This is not the case with nonexistent entities like current kings of France, round squares, and the like.

# Does Russell's proposal evade his own objection?
Due to complications he notices in both Meinong's and Frege's theories, Russell abandons the idea that denoting phrases *mean* the objects they denote -- in other words, that these phrases as constituent parts of expressions contribute genuine objects as their meaning. Instead, Russell's theory posits that denoting phrases, themselves, mean nothing. Instead, their logical form defines a meaning to every proposition in which they occur.

Russell proposes a sort of procedure to translate or "interpret" propositional phrases in terms of quantified and predicated variables^[[[Russell On Denoting.pdf]], 481]. For example, the proposition "I met a man" is interpreted as "'I met $x$, and $x$ is human' is not always false." This interpretation avoids the tricky detail that "a man" means some definite man we don't have the information to denote *in particular*, since "a man" isn't taken to mean anything in isolation. Rather, the proposition in which "a man" occurs has meaning.

A similar interpretation helps us understand how Russell's theory obeys the law of excluded middle. A proposition about a nonexistent object, like "The king of France is bald," becomes "It is not always false of $x$ that $x$ is the king of France, and that $x$ is bald, and that 'if $y$ is the king of France, $y$ is identical with $x$' is always true of $y$." This proposition is false, since no $x$ satisfies being the king of France, as France is a Republic. The negation of this proposition, however, is true, given that it begins with "It is always false of $x$ that $x$ is the king of France, ..." and we established that this is so. Russell points out that a similar sounding proposition, namely "There is an entity which is the current king of France and is not bald," is also false. However, this is not quite the negation of the meaning of our first proposition, and so the law of excluded middle is upheld.

# Is Russell's objection fair and justified?
I do not see Russell's objection to Meinong as a flat-out refutation of Meinong's theory. In other words, Russell's objection hinging on the law of non-contradiction does not mean that that he finds Meinong's position contradictory in itself. Rather, he finds the consequences of abandoning non-contradiction for certain classes of objects to be logically unpalletable. Also, I think Russell's problems with Meinong's theories go beyond just those concerning denoting phrases. For example, in [[Russell Review of Meinong 1905.pdf]] he identifies how contradictory properties of impossible objects present problems for counting and thus mathematics^[p. 533].

Meinong, to his credit, defends his theory with the point that non-contradiction need not apply to "beingless objects." In fact, in thinking about logically contradictory objects (like round squares) it doesn't make sense to uphold non-contradiction anyway. Furthermore, Meinong refutes ontological arguments relating to "the existent round square" or "the existent God" by pointing out the difference between existence as a thetic judgement and being existent as a synthetic one^[https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/meinong/]. Thus, characterizing "the existent round square" as existent in a synthetic way does not have strong ontological bearing on its thetic nonexistence.

The alternative Russell presents is complex. However, I prefer his theory of language to one that allows both a sentence and its negation to be true -- even if that consequence arises from good intentions around our talk about imaginary and nonexistent things. Also, like Russell, I don't see the distinction between thetic *existence* and synthetic *being existent* as all that clear. Under Meinong's theory, the truth of all propositions "The $x$ and $y$ $\varphi$ is $x$ and $y$." feels much too free-form, especially given that $x$ and $y$ may contradict or include "existent." I feel like this free-formedness weakens the significance of the correspondence between language and world that we want to explore, and that Russell takes such pains to preserve in the development of his own theory.