#Stanford #Stanford-Winter-2022 #philosophy #PHIL170 #ethical-theory #essay #outline 
___
Keeping with outline from [[PHIL 170 - Second Paper Outline v1 (2022-02-18)]], but now into topic sentences that will expand into the paper.

==Introduction / abstract topic sentence goes here==

**Kant asserts in the *Groundwork* that only actions done solely from the motive of duty have moral worth.** In order to parse this claim, we need some context about Kant's project in the *Groundwork*. We should also demystify some language he uses.

**Kant introduces "moral worth" to pick out actions done with "good willing."** The good will is a centerpiece of Kant's theory in *Groundwork*. It is the only thing that is basically good. The good will grounds a person's actions in correspondance with their moral principles. In that respect, the good will *makes someone good*. When actions are done with good willing, they have "moral worth."

**Further, to Kant, "duty" is another concept describing moral actions.**^[One of the weaker topic sentences...] Specifically, duty is something we may act *for the sake of*, and so duty provides motivation to act. Call such actions "dutiful actions" for brevity. Duty is closely related to the good will, yet it incorporates the obstacles that commonly inhibit us from acting morally.

**Consider the example where I help my friend move out of their dorm.** IKEA furniture is heavy, so my own self-interest motivates me to bail out and watch TV. Acting *for the sake of duty* thus involves overcoming that obstacle (my self-interest), getting off the couch, and moving boxes. Kant will identify good willing in my action -- I acted in correspondance to my moral principles -- and thereby assign it moral worth.^[Not sure about this passage, might omit since it breaks the flow of the outline a little.]

We can better understand moral worth with examples of actions where it does not apply. There are two such examples in *Groundwork*.

Kant's first example is the shopkeeper. Here, a shopkeeper charges new customers the best price, despite their inexperience and thus probable gullibility. Kant says the shopkeeper's action lacks moral worth. Her action was morally correct, yet it was motivated by profit. There are other competing shops, so it is economical to charge fairly. Barbara Herman helps us understand why moral worth is lacking. The shopkeeper's action aligned with the moral good, but only by happenstance. Were the shop on some remote desert highway, the shopkeeper's profit motive could easily justify overcharging customers. Thus, we cannot *depend* on this motive for morally correct actions. When it produces them, it does so by accident. Were the shopkeeper acting dutifully, by contrast, she would charge fairly in any location.

Kant's second example is the sympathetic person. This person simply feels good when they help people. Here, changed circumstances like the desert highway cannot help us. Our sympathetic person helps people in all circumstances. Why does Kant withhold moral worth from this person's actions? Again, Barbara Herman helps us out. It is, again, a happy coincidence when this person's inclination leads them to morally correct actions. After all, they are inclined to *help*, not to help in ways that are necessarily good. Kant says of these inclinations that they "lack moral content" (Herman, 364). The sympathetic person might help an elderly man cross the street. They may, later in the evening, (unwittingly) help an art thief load stolen goods into their truck. Once again, we cannot *depend* on their inclination to produce morally correct actions -- except by accident.

Kant's claim that only dutiful actions have moral worth has, nontheless, challenged some readers. We can take Kant as evaluating a *solely* dutiful act as morally preferable to the same act done with pleasure. Say I am the sympathetic man. I am helping the elderly man cross the street, inclined by the pleasure of helping. How is it morally better if I instead despise the man, and only begrudingly help him as duty commands?

Barbara Herman, in "On the Value of Acting from the Motive of Duty," helps us address this challenge. The challenge is chiefly posed at what Herman calls *overdetermined actions* -- specifically, actions done for the sake of duty but *also* for other (nonmoral) inclinations.

Herman suggests we ought to get clear about how to read Kant concerning overdetermined actions. What can we say of the shopkeeper who charges fairly, out of *both* the motive of duty and the motive for profit?

Unfortunately, the shopkeeper acting for both duty and profit fails to be morally dependable in the same way as before. The shopkeeper may still act immorally should the profit motive dictate. In other words, these two motives might still compete. The dutiful motive, while present, might still lose out to a stronger competitor. This result tells us that the shopkeeper acting morally is something of an accident, up to contingent factors. We do not want to go about assigning moral worth to actions like these. Thus, this configuration does not work.

Still committed to Kantianism, we might add the constraint that the dutiful motive be *overpowering*. No matter what competing motives are present, the proper sense of duty should counter them all, and compel the good willed person to act morally. Under this view, our shopkeeper now has an *overpowering* sense of duty when charging customers fairly. Thus, no extent of remoteness, or profit to be gained, will sway the shopkeeper's decision to act morally. It seems as though we have solved our original problem, and should read Kant's motive of duty in this way.

Unfortunately again, this setup misses an account of moral worth that is satisfactory. Consider our desert highway shopkeeper again. Suppose she encounter a foreign customer willing to pay ten times the standard price for an item. Our shopkeeper, owing to her overpowering motive of duty, instead charges them the ticket price (to moral applause). The next foreign customer, a rich oil baron, walks in and offers to pay ten *million* times that price. Now, our shopkeeper's dutiful faculties break down. It turns out that her moral motivations were not actually *completely* overpowering. But this means she is lacking the motive of duty we agreed on! This new awareness should render her past dutiful actions morally worthless. Yet this result seems wrong, according to Herman. We should be able to credit the shopkeeper with moral worth in the first case. Thus, we need an alternative.

Barbara Herman proposes that morally worthy actions are actions *determined* by the motive of duty. This proposal differs from the condition that the motive of duty be the *only one present*. In our shopkeeper example, the action is morally worthy because the shopkeeper *acted on* her motive of duty. It is possible for other motives to be present but not acted on. Otherwise we could make no sense of "resisting temptation."

For an illustrative example, let's consider the sympathetic man again. The first time he helps the elderly man cross the street, he acknowledges his motive of duty to help the man. Yet, this motive does not spur him into action. Instead, he is motivated by an immediate inclination to *help*. Such actions bring him pleasure. Now suppose that the next day, our sympathetic man wakes up despondant. Despairing at the state of the human race, he is no longer inclined to help like he was before. If, *now*, the man helps the elderly man cross the street, it is his motive of duty that spurs him into action. Thus, this action *now* has moral worth where it did not before.

We can also account for cases where the motive of duty and other motives are at odds. Our sympathetic man, walking behind the art museum at night, notices someone struggling with a heavy parcel at the back door. The man's immediate inclination is to help. Yet, his better sense steps in. It is a moral obligation to not abet someone in thieving fine art. So, acting on his motive of duty, the sympathetic man refrains from helping and instead calls the cops. *That* action has moral worth -- not because the man fought against his inclination! Instead, it is because he acted out of a sense of duty that the action counts as such.