# [[Halpern & Pearl 2005, “Causes and Explanations- A Structural-Model Approach. Part II- Explanations” (ANNOTATED).pdf|Halpern and Pearl 2005, “Causes and Explanations: A Structural-Model Approach. Part II: Explanations”]]
## #reading-notes 
Tags: #structural-causal-models #explanation #causality
___
This paper is the second of two papers on Causes and Explanations by Halpern and Pearl. The paper begins with a formal treatment of cause, but the more thorough discussion comes from Part 1. To Halpern and Pearl (and many other researchers) causes are "events" (random variables taking on values) within a causal model that obeys certain structural equations. There are exogenous variables, which are not subject to explanation, and endogenous variables, which depend on other variables in a specifiable way, and may be considered causes. The authors give a formal treatment of sufficient causes and how they differ from actual causes, which are basically the most minimal sufficient conjunctions of events.

Moving on to explanations, Halpern and Pearl define explanations as facts that, if known, would constitute an actual cause of the explanandum. This definition considers explanation's goal to be to provide information missing from the inquirer's epistemic state that establishes causation. The agent's epistemic state is allowed to have uncertainty as to the context (the exogenous variables outside the causal model) and also the workings of the model itself, both of which the authors formally define. The authors also provide ways of talking about more "likely" explanations (explanations that happen within a more probable context and are therefore more "good") and also more "powerful" explanations (explanations that change the prior probability of the context by the largest amounts once conditioned upon). There is an inherent tension between more "good" (more likely) explanations and more powerful ones.

Finally, in a section discussing future work, the authors address how it was difficult to form a good characterization of disjunctive explanations, and also how there's no good way to deal with the tension between goodness and explanatory power.