#honors-thesis #outline #trust 
___
# Abstract

# Introduction
In her 1986 paper "Trust and Antitrust", Annette Baier grapples with whether to construe trust as a two-place or a three-place predicate.^[[[Annette Baier 1986, "Trust and Antitrust" - Reading Notes]], p. 258]. I would like to go further and make the case for a conception of trust as a *four-place predicate*. I will defend why I think this four-place predicate deserves to fall under the concept of trust. Also, I will talk a bit about the application of this predicate to the field of Explainable Artificial Intelligence, where trust seems at once essential and yet confused.

Philosopher Richard Holton uses the example of the trust fall, familiar to us from drama class, to illustrate his theory.^[[[Holton 1994, “Deciding to Trust, Coming to Believe” (annotated).pdf]], p. 1]. To Holton there are moments where we *decide* to trust. The tipping point at the top of a trust fall is one such moment. I think that Holton has struck on something with his focus on this narrow time slice where trusting occurs. That moment at the top of a trust fall I will call a *trusting instance*. I think trusting instances can help us understand trust as it occurs in important real-world settings, most notably that of artificial intelligence.

Not all trust is best explained with trusting instances. The trust between decades-long spouses might be articulated in implicit ways over many years. It might be hard to grasp how such a trusting relationship decomposes into instances. But trust in many other settings is fleeting. We trust a waiter to ring up only our meal, and not browse her Amazon wish list with our credit card in hand. We trust the stranger at the intersection with blinker flashing to be turning left. And we trust the calendar on our smart phone to have faithfully recorded the location of our coffee chat.

To be clear -- there is a sense of trust in which I *trust* my calendar to generally inform me of my meetings and their locations. One could write a whole philosophy paper about what it is to trust your calendar in this way. But that is not what I am doing. There is I think *another sense* where I *trust* my calendar to give me the correct location of my *Tuesday morning coffee chat with Ms. Doe that we happened to schedule*... I think the point is made. I am interested in this latter sense.

Other philosophers agree that trust left as a pluralistic concept in analytical philosophy is not so bad.^[[[Simpson, Thomas W. 2012, "What is Trust?".pdf]], p. 551, which I still have to read...] In this way my arguments here are not to be taken as a refutation of dominant theories of interpersonal trust such as [[Annette Baier 1986, "Trust and Antitrust" - Reading Notes|Baier 1986]]. Instead, I propose the trusting instance as a way to get a handle on trust in particularly vexing instances, where we might nontheless be compelled to account for and even quantify its presence or absense. I will give one such compelling example, that of Explainable Artificial Intelligence, in a later section.

We'll show that trusting instances are good condenders to explain trust in scenarios where *relationships* cannot form -- i.e., in fleeting one-off instances with other people or in our interactions with machines.

## Trust in the context of machine learning
# Trust in recent philosophical inquiry
Want to consult [[McLeod 2015, "Trust" - Reading Notes]] on this probably
## Personal theories
### Motives-based theories
#### Baier's expectation of goodwill
#### Hardin's encapsulated interests
#### Virtue account of trustworthiness
### Risk-assessment theories
### Normative expectation theories
#### Holton's "participant stance"
## Impersonal theories
### Nguyen's "unquestioning attitude"
### Taddeo's "e-trust"
### Buechner and Tavani's "diffuse, default model"
# The trusting instance
