#Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #CS #CS110 #exam 
# Spring 2019 Final Exam
## Question 3
- astronauts need to
	- get control of the launch pad
	- somehow signal to the technicians that a rocket is ready and has capacity $X$
	- wait for technicans to signal back that rocket is fully loaded
- technicians need to
	- wait for astronaut to signal that there's a rocket to load
	- until the rocket is fully loaded (or we've loaded everything)
		- grab an empty container
		- load the container (decrement remaining capacity)
		- if container was the last one to load
			- notify astronaut to proceed

### Notes
- all global variables should be prefixed with `static`
- astronaut should only create as many martian threads as there are boxes on the ship (this might be < capacity!!!)
- seems like the solution code is avoiding the use of `condition_variable_any`s like the plague -- just use `semaphore`s!

## Question 4
### a)
One usage pattern is as a "resource counter." In this pattern we can think of the semaphore counter as the number of available permits, and it's typically initialized with a counter value greater than 1. Threads wait on the semaphore when they wish to obtain a permit to do some work on a piece of data, and signal when done to return that permit to the pool of available ones.

The second usage pattern is for "thread rendezvous." In this pattern wait and signal operate much more like `sigwait` in multiprocessing parlance, and they're used to coordinate concurrency between different threads. Here the counter is typically initialized to 0, and a thread waiting on the semaphore will block until another thread signals, indicating some sequential work has been completed, and allowing the first thread to proceeed.

### b)
An I/O bound program is delayed mostly by threads waiting on securing network connections, or waiting for their request to be scheduled on a different machine. In these programs most of the time spent is spent in a waiting state. Contrast this with CPU-bound programs, where the bulk of the time spent is time "on-CPU" doing work that requires computational burden.

A program would be I/O bound if speeding up the CPU did not meaningfully speed up the program.

### c)
Lazy thread initialization is critical when the number of independent jobs to be done vastly outnumbers the size of the threadpool. A good example is a real-life load balancing application, where potentially tens of thousands of threads need to be ultimately spawned to query each machine. If we initialize these threads in a non-lazy way, we will quickly hit the limit on the number of threads that can exist for a single process, since each thread partitions the finite-sized user stack into a substack.

One downside of lazy thread initialization is that we have to set the number of threads we want active at any given time. If we had total control of the CPU, and knew that we'd never spawn more threads than allowed on our system, it would be slightly more efficient to just initialize all threads in the non-lazy way and let the thread manager figure out how to schedule them. Put otherwise, there's more room for programmer error in the way threads are scheduled, since ThreadPools schedule in a FIFO-mannar, and this could result in slowing down our computation compared to the non-lazy alternative.

==Answer says downside is the initial time we require to spin up a thread when we first launch it, which would only occur at the program's beginning if we don't lazily initialize==

### d)
A mutex is necessary for a condition variable to work properly because
1. If there's another thread writing to the `condition` variable and we attempt reading it without a mutex, we risk loading a stale value of the variable before assessing the condition, so we could accidentally be stuck waiting forever if we load condition right before it changes and then act on that old value.
2. Since mutexes restrict only one thread at a time to evaluating the condition for a condition variable, we need them if we ever want to restrict the number of threads able to act on the condition. Say, if 10 threads are waiting on some condition but we only want one of them to wake up and obtain permission to proceed, we couldn't do this without a mutex. In short, a mutex is what allows the `notify_one` method to work correctly