Prompt: *Explain and assess Putnam's Twin Earth argument for the claim that what counts as “water” is not determined solely by psychological facts.*

# Introduction
In his 1973 paper “Meaning and Reference,” Hilary Putnam challenges two assumptions in the received theory of meaning in philosophy, specifically as they relate to natural kind terms. Putnam is responding to a line of theory dating back to the ancients and John Locke, who contrasted real and nominal essences in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Also, Putnam considers theories from the 1920s on meaning and reference, including work by Gottleib Frege and Bertrand Russell. With his “Twin Earth” thought experiment, Putnam is challenging one of the assumptions present since Frege in the theory of meaning, namely that particular psychological states are sufficient to determine a language user’s knowledge of a term’s meaning.

This paper will be divided into two parts. In the first part, I will articulate Putnam’s argument and its consequences as best I can. In the second part, I will assess Putnam’s argument, raise objections, and reply to them.

# Explication
## What is the received view to which Putnam is reacting?
The received view on meanings of natural kind terms originates at least with John Locke, who distinguishes between real and nominal essences in his *Essay Concerning Human Understanding*. Locke utilizes his nominal essences to articulate a theory of intension. According to Locke, when we use a natural kind term, that term's intension is determined by the necessity and sufficiency conditions we consider for membership to that term. My intension of the word "banana" leverages what I consider necessary and sufficient properties of bananas -- that they are yellow and edible, that they peel, etc. These conditions are understandable to me, and need not entertain any opaque notion of essential *banana-ness*. Thus my intension of "banana" is both psychologically accessible and personal to me.

Gottleib Frege's theory of meaning, also predating Putnam, revises Locke's view by equating meanings with *abstract* rather than chiefly mental entities. To Frege, meanings are public and can be accessed by multiple people at different times. It is only the grasping of these abstract entities that remains a personal affair, which is to say that grasping, understanding, or knowing the meaning of a term is only as much as being in a particular mental state. I am in some complex but particular mental state when I successfully factor 100 into $2\times 2\times 5\times 5$; the same is true when I understand what "porpoise" means and how it's different from "purpose."

Moreover, for Frege, to grasp "porpoise" is not only to possess this particular psychological state, but to set forth the necessary and sufficient conditions that characterize the actual and possible extensions of porpoise -- that is, what is and what could be a porpoise, and what could not.

## What is Putnam's argument?
Putnam is going to attack the idea that any particular mental state suffices for understanding the meaning of a term. He does so with his "Twin Earth" thought experiment.

Putnam's experiment supposes the existence of a faraway planet called "Twin Earth" which is particle-for-particle identical with Earth, save for a minute difference. That difference is the following. On Twin Earth, the substance filling rivers and lakes and flowing from taps is not water but water$_{TE}$, a substance with chemical formula $XYZ$. Twin Earthlings call water$_{TE}$ "water" just like we call water "water" (the English-speaking ones, anyway...).

Putnam also introduces two characters -- Oscar, who lives on Earth in 1750, and Twoscar, who lives on Twin Earth at the same time. When Oscar sees water on Earth he calls it "water," and when Twoscar sees water$_{TE}$ on Twin Earth he calls it "water." We may assume Oscar and Twoscar have lived practically identical lives. Also, since the chemical structures of both water and water$_{TE}$ have yet to be discovered, we may further assume that Oscar and Twoscar have no diverging beliefs about "water" whatsoever. To both of them, "water" is what flows from taps, what you drink when thirsty, and so on. The crux is that Oscar and Twoscar possess *identical mental states* concerning their understanding of the natural kind term "water." Yet of course, Oscar's "water" beliefs are about water, and Twoscar's "water" beliefs are not about water but about water$_{TE}$, so it is inconceivable that these terms would mean the same thing and yet pick out entirely different extensions. Note that Oscar and Twoscar's ignorance of their "water"'s chemical makeup does not affect the extension of their terms. On Earth, water was just as much $H_2O$ in 1750 as in 2021, and so for $XYZ$ on Twin Earth.

Putnam's Twin Earth is thus an example where psychological states are insufficient to determine the meaning of a term.

## With what picture of language does Putnam's argument leave us?
Putnam's intention (haha) with Twin Earth is to show us that the meanings of Oscar's and Twoscar's terms cannot reside entirely in their mental states. Instead, it is their environments that play a role in determining the meanings of terms. This theory has particular import concerning how natural kind terms actually work in our language, since it entails that you can both say and *mean* "water" without understanding the essential properties of water, such as its chemical composition. When I look at my desk and say "that is a glass of water," my sentence implies a certain sameness relation between the substance in the glass and other substances I have encountered -- the ones filling lakes and flowing from taps. Critically, I can say the same sentence in 1750 with no knowledge of the "water = $H_2O$" identity (but I can say it and be wrong in my belief, for example if I had traveled to Twin Earth on vacation).

For reasons I cannot fully explain for brevity's sake, I am also able to say both "those over there are elm trees" or "that ring is gold" without advanced knowledge in botany or metallurgy, instead relying on a "division of linguistic labor" implicating other people in my linguistic community (Putnam 704). I still *mean* elm trees when I say "elm trees," even if I can't tell elm and beech trees apart. The picture of language we are left with is one with meaning much more enmeshed in our environments. We cannot rely on or even expect our minds to hold all the meaning we transact with in our lives as language users. Quite a lot of the meanings we intend bear on subject matter experts in our linguistic communities, and have less to do with our individual psychological states than they do with the genuine constitution of the world.

# Assessment
## Objections
While Putnam's theory of meaning is attractive, it may be objected that it presents an awkward picture of how language works in some common situations. I think Putnam's Twin Earth argument closes the door on a pragmatic element of language use that I will call "loose talk," which I take to be an important aspect of our usage of natural kind terms.

To give a concrete example: suppose my roommate asks, "Could you bring me a glass of water?" and I oblige and pour her some liquid from the tap. We will suppose that it's 2021 and both she and I learned that "water is $H_2O$" in elementary school science class, and that no one has gone and replaced my tap with a gin still or what have you. When I hand my roommate the glass and say "Here is your glass of water," I really feel that my use of "water" extends to *everything* in that glass, including the (hopefully!) microscopic specks of debris from the pipes and trace amounts of salt in the tap water. Surely I do not intend to draw some complex 3D boundary around the specks in the water, and surely my roommate is not expecting some high-fidelity sample distilled at some lab. At the same time, our shared understanding of "water" is not *meaningless* -- if I had genuinely brought her gin, I must have misunderstood or willfully disobeyed her. There are, once again, necessary and sufficient conditions for kind-membership that apply in my roommate's definition of "water," only these conditions relax to include extensions falling outside of the rigid "water = $H_2O$" designation.

At this point, a proponent of Putnam might say, "This is all fine. The material world does not cleave evenly to fit our natural kind terms *all the time*, especially in day-to-day life. Just because the author's roommate is willing to accept some impure samples does not change the fact that 'consisting of $H_2O$' remains the essential property of water. That essential property determines the real extension of 'water,' which needs to generalize beyond this one encounter with your roommate."

This reply makes sense to me. The pragmatics of one particular encounter where "water" is involved shouldn't be allowed to impact the extension of "water" in general. I would say, though, that such pragmatically governed extension-determining intensions pop up in most of our everyday use of language, to enough of an extent that they deserve mention in any satisfactory theory. Let's think again about my roommate's request, "Could you bring me a glass of water?" Not only do her conditions for kind-membership for "water" relax in this utterance, but they relax to differing extents depending on contextual factors. Is my roommate  thirsty and requesting a drink? In this case salt water will not do. Is my roommate holding a sandy surfboard in need of cleaning? In this case it seems like "water" extends to salt water, even though the word tokens in the sentence are the same. Further, we might be mid-experiment in a chemistry lab, in which case my roommate most probably means "water" in Putnam's "water = $H_2O$" sense. If we are wedded to the idea that "water = $H_2O$" governs the meaning of "water" in every (Earthling) utterance, we miss out on an ability to characterize much of the contextual transacting for which language is actually used.

At this point a proponent of Putnam might reply, "It seems like you're smearing the theory by including hidden predication in the roommate's utterances. If instead the sentence was 'Could you get me a glass of water to drink?,' it would be understood that *human-drinkable water* is the term being dealt with, which has its own necessary extension in the same way that *water* does." I think this is possibly fair, but then again, part of our interest in the English term "water" includes its ability to mean different things *without* specifying with linguistic predicates, but instead by relying on context clues.