Prompt: *Explain and assess Putnam's Twin Earth argument for the claim that what counts as “water” is not determined solely by psychological facts.*

1. Explication
	1. What is the received view to which Putnam is reacting?
		- Putnam follows Frege, who divorces from the conventionally-held view that meanings are mental entities
		- Frege proposes that meanings are "public" abstract concepts / entities, rather than personal mental ones
		- Theories in Frege's vein from then on rested on this assumption that to *know* the meaning of a term was a matter of being in a certain psychological state
	2. What is Putnam's argument?
		- Putnam initializes the Twin Earth thought experiment to attack this received view that knowing meaning equates to a psychological state of the correct kind
		- In particular, Putnam will show that psychological states *are not enough* to determine meanings of terms; that psychological states to not *suffice* to explain a language user's knowledge or understanding of a term.
	3. What picture of language does Putnam's argument leave us with?
		- Simply put, Putnam's argument is to show that meanings "ain't in the head" -- that it takes environmental factors to fix the meaning of a term as one uses it. This has particular significance for language surrounding natural kinds, because it implies that we can understand or *mean* "water" without understanding the underlying nature of water. When I look down at my desk and say "that is a glass of water," I don't need to understand the essence of water that permits the sample on my desk to fall under the extension of "water." I can simply use the name of this kind term.
2. Assessment
	1. Objection
		- One objection to Putnam's view would say basically that the identity of water as "$H_2O$" is arbitrary
			- I think "$H_2O$" is a satsifactory definition of something that water *consists of*, but it's by no means a unique definition for water
			- For example, we know that hydrogen and oxygen atoms *consist of* protons, neutrons, and electrons composed together in a certain way, and moreover these constituent parts themselves consist of quarks arranged in a particular way
			- Where should we stop?
			- The trick is in understanding that "water = $H_2O$" *operates* to communicate certain properties of water
		- Another objection could be an intuitive observation about "loose talk"
			- Say my roommate asks me for a glass of water, and I go to fill a glass of water from the tap and give it to her
			- Both of us, in 2021, *understand* that water is chemically composed to H2O
			- Yet, when I say "here is your glass of water" and hand it to her, I really feel that my use of the term "water" intends to refer to *everything* in the glass -- including the (hopefully, yuck!) microscopic specks of debris from the pipes or small bits of salts dissolved in the water.
			- Does it sound correct to call me an imprecise user of language because I intended "water" to mean all of the stuff in my roommate's glass? It's hard to understand how I might have failed here. My roommate used a word to request something loose, but still specific, and I understood the use of the word enough to fulfill her request. That's how language *works* most of the time, and Putnam's model seems to make everyday linguistic interactions like this unnecessarily complicated.
			- Moreover, I think that to say "consisting of H2O" is what determines the extension of water prevents us from characterizing "looseness," which is a relenvant property to the way we use language.
				- "Can you get me a cup of water?" --> is this at home (salt water won't do)? are you holding a surfboard you want washed down (salt water would do)? are we in a chemistry lab (anything less than pure water is probably bad)?
	2. Reply
		- To my objection around "loose talk," Putnam would probably want to say that our usage of "water" in these cases is not as a natural kind term.