# Introduction
- 3rd / 4th time teaching this version of the course
- ethical philosophy at a sophisticated / high level :)
	- geared toward people with experience
	- not much time spent reviewing philosophical terms & distinctions
	- not much in the skills / techniques of good philosophical writing
- no perspectives on ethical theory (including Jorah's) have any intrinsic authority to them
	- try to unpack arguments, get to the deep structure of reflective thought
	- what to do, how to treat one another, etc.
- material is at a high level of abstraction

## Running an experiment
- plan is to have unofficial "seminar groups" for each class -- only 7 faces discussing material

# 2 Examples
1. Example from David Hume about repaying the loan that the loaner has completely forgotten about
	- Do you keep the promise to repay the loan? Why or why not?
2. Example about a rich friend on a deserted island changing his will right before they die
	- Do you go back on your promise after your friend dies?
	- Not given the choice of whether to *make* the promise, so given that, you have to upkeep it?
	- self-interest vs. beneficence, loyalty, etc?
	- your own interests vs. the interests of others? the interests of the dead?
	- your own character / integrity on the line -- "your word is your bond" -- for the sake of what will you consider sacrificing your own integrity?

# Jorah on "Ethical Theory"
**"Normative" Ethics**: systematic, reflective thinking about ethical questions / problems
- "applied" ethics
- e.g.:
	- when / why is it wrong to lie?
	- why should we keep our promises?
	- how should we balance the concerns / interests of strangers with our own?
	- abortion / euthanasia
	- what is blame? when is it justified?

**Ethical Theory**: reflective thinking about more generally / abstractly ethics as a whole
- what sorts of motives are involved in acting well?
- what kinds of character traits are virtuous, righteous, admirable?

**Meta-Ethics**: reflective thought about ethical *language* and *thought* -- the nature of ethical *properties* and *relations*
- can sentences with ethical content be capable of truth / falsity?
	- is their purpose to describe the world, or something else?

- any attempt to think naturally about right and wrong is going to force us to think about the nature / purpose of ethical concepts, more abstractly
	- normative ethics and meta-ethics will "sandwich" ethical theory, the central thread of this class
		- we'll talk about stuff bleeding into each of these

## Ethical Theory, take two
*Utilizing recognizably philosophical means in order to arrive at and defend convincing answers to questions about how to live our lives*
- whether to tell the truth, white lie, concretely -- when should we lie? how do we distribute scarce resources? is there anything at all required of us *unconditionally*?
- or more abstractly, whether it matters at all to respect promises, property rights, etc.
- shades off into questions about "meaning of life" / existentialism, politics / institutions, questions about value more broadly (e.g. aesthetics)
	- why does anything matter?
- questions about the use of language / properties / concepts

## A "theory" of how-to...
The model of a scientific theory? Explains how things work...?
- not quite the same thing... it's a theory that should have practical ramifications for what you *should* do

# The people we'll be discussing
## Some major traditions in ethical thought
### Utilitarianism
Happiness / pleasure are ultimately good. Ethical theory helps us ensure that we act as individuals, and organize society, in ways that bring about the *greatest amounts* of happiness and/or pleasure
- ethics as the *how to cause* (pleasure)

### Kant
Ethics about acting in ways that show proper regard or respect for one another as free and rational
- ethics as *how to* choose our actions only in ways other rational actors can endorse or accept
	- decisions that other people could in principle agree to
- morality as "social contract"

### Virtue
Ethics is about living a flourishing human life -- requires cultivation of the *virtues*
- not quite the same thing as a *happy* human life
- Ethical theory as *how to* develop / practice the habits, traits, and dispositions to constitute an excellent or virtuous character

### Skepticism
In some way, the main tradition in ethics has wandered off the path, or set off on the wrong path
- systematic ethical theory that other thinkers advocate leads to a distorted image of a good human life
- ethics "as a hindrance"
- Ethics threatens to alienate us from what makes a life meaningful or worthwhile for the person living it

# Syllabus
- 15% participation
- 15% three short assignments
- 20% 1st paper (3-4 pages)
- 25% 2nd paper (3-4 pages)
- 25% take-home final exam

# Homework assignment
- reading 2 papers -- John Rawles and Jack Smart
	- quite pitted against each other
	- Smart's paper is not a response to Rawles (although written at the same time) but arguing exactly against his position
- *come up w/ 1-2 sentences about the deep point of philosophical dispute between these two papers*