#PHIL181 #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #reading-notes #reading-reaction #Kripke
2021-10-14
___
# Reading Reaction for Kripke's [[Saul Kripke, "Naming and Necessity" (excerpts).pdf|"Naming and Necessity"]]
## PHIL 181
Kripke’s lectures have had enormous influence in structuring debates in many, many fields of philosophy; you cannot be too familiar with them. Try to get very clear about the different roles Kripke says descriptions can play in descriptive accounts of proper-name reference (being equivalent in meaning, fixing reference). What are his key arguments that descriptions are not equivalent in meaning to proper names? What are his key arguments that they do not fix the referents of proper names? Try also to get very clear about Kripke’s explanation of the distinction between necessity/possibility and a priority/a posteriority, and also about the role played in Kripke’s conception of language by the notion of a sentence _being true considered as describing a certain possible world_.

___

Kripke says that under description theories of proper names, the descriptions themselves may play one of two roles. In the first and perhaps more conventional view, the description or family of descriptions are what give the meaning of the name -- under this view "Saul Kripke" _means_ "the man who wrote _Naming and Necessity_ and _Y_ and _Z_ and ...".

Under an alternative view, we might take the descriptions not as fixing the name's meaning, but as sort of cognitive tools for fixing the name's _referent_. Under this view it's possible that names don't actually mean anything -- "Saul Kripke" doesn't mean anything including "the man who such and such" -- but rather refer _using_ their associated descriptions in some particular way.

Kripke will reject the latter view largely because it seems to present problems with negative existential sentences. We would like sentences like "Moses did not exist" to equate to something like "There was no man who such and such and such..." in meaning, but a theory of reference for proper names does not give us the machinery for doing so, because we cannot replace "Moses" with a description of any kind as it's not mandated to have any meaning whatsoever.

Kripke spends a lot more time on the meaning side of the descriptions view. Methodologically I saw his work in _Naming and Necessity_ as doing something like "death by overwhelming number of edge cases" for the descriptions view, though I could be missing some argumentative through line from the paper. A major oversight in the descriptions view that Kripke picks up on is this conflation between epistemological a priority and metaphysical necessity. Both concern the statement "If _X_ exists, then _X_ has most of the _phi_'s" -- Kripke posits two theses of the descriptions view, one being that this statement is known a priori, the other that the statement expresses a necessary truth. Kripke is careful to point out that necessary truths say something _about the world_ and have no epistemological import -- specifically, they assert something to be true in all possible worlds. I think this construal is influential to Kripke's account of proper names as "rigid designators," which pick out (designate) the same object in all possible worlds.