#PHIL181 #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #reading-notes #reading-reaction #Quine 
2021-10-12
___
# Reading Reaction for [[Quine Two Dogmas of Empiricism.pdf|Quine's "Two Dogmas of Empiricism"]]
I know that my fluency in the Logical Positivist realm of philosophy is lackluster. However, in reading Quine's "Two Dogmas of Empiricism" I had trouble understanding what it is precisely that Quine wants by "the notion of analyticity... understood in advance" (31). Put otherwise, I'm not convinced that analyticity can be conceptually analyzed linguistically, at the same level that we'd analyze the mechanics of synonyms or denoting phrases. Making "satisfactory sense of 'analytic'" sounds backwards to me -- I feel like analyticity is a logical prior we need to make sense of anything external to a preset logical language (30).

To be more charitable, I will say I found Quine's rejection of Carnap's "state-descriptor" analyticity to be compelling. Synonyms like "bachelor" and "unmarried male" do present a new problem, and one that helps divorce "logical truth" from "analyticity" in a way I think state descriptors don't account for. Specifically, "No bachelors are married" turns out to be synthetic _and_ _yet_ still true in virtue of meaning under state descriptors. So a conceptual analysis of analyticity separate from logical tautology seems required, despite its centrality to the act of conceptual analysis itself (at least in my head). Maybe what's unclear to me are Quine's "victory conditions," i.e. the point of clarity at which he would be satisfied.