#Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #PHIL181 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #reading-reaction 
2021-12-01
___
# Reading Reaction for Elisabeth Camp, [[Camp Slurring Perspectives.pdf|"Slurring Perspectives"]]
## PHIL 181
I think Elisabeth Camp's account of slurs is insightful -- particularly, that their function in language is to signal the speaker's "allegiance" to the slur's particular "derogating perspective" on the group determined by the slur's extension ("Slurring Perspectives," 331). I think that this angle does nicely to disentangle truth conditions from derogatory content when it comes to propositions containing slurs. Camp identifies the _speaker's_ allegiance to the derogatory perspective, instead of the derogatory property's assignment to the slurs extension _itself_. I think this is elegant.

More generally, however, this paper topic gets me interested in the taxonomy of exceptional language artifacts like slurs. Another category of exceptional language that Camp identifies is expressives, like 'damn' or 'fuck.' These have a different functional character in language use from slurs. This got me thinking -- is there any way to exhaustively identify or enumerate the "exceptional" classes of linguistic objects from what we consider "normal" or "conventional" ones? I think back to Frege and Russell's accounts of natural language as effectively languages of predicate calculus. Slurs and expressives fall outside of any such predicate calculus, or at least have non-trivial rules for their application. What other classes would we need to consider before we could justifiably call our philosophy of language "holistic" in any way?