#PHIL181 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #reading-reaction #Grice
2021-11-04
___
# Reading Reaction for H.P. Grice, [[H.P. Grice 1957, "Meaning".pdf|"Meaning"]]
## PHIL 181
*Prompt*: A “reductive” account of a certain kind of fact says that facts of that kind are _really only_ more or less complicated packages of facts of another kind. Grice is trying to reduce facts about what speakers _mean_ to other sorts of fact. Which sorts? What is his methodology---how does he test hypothesis about what constitutes a speaker meaning something?
___
In my reading of "Meaning," it seems like Grice is trying to reduce facts about what speakers *mean* to a package of other facts, including what the speaker *believes* as well as their *intentions* for conveying their utterance in the way that they are. More specifically, for cases of informative meaning (as opposed to imperative meaning), speaker *A* intends to induce some belief *p* to an audience via utterance *x*. The inducing of said belief also happens by means of the audience recognizing *A*'s intention with their utterance. It is when these conditions hold that utterance $x$ *means* something.

Of course, the sense of "means" above is what Grice calls *nonnatural meaning*, which he distinguishes from natural meaning. Natural meaning encapsulates sentences like "The recent budget means that we shall have a bad year." In this case it's impossible to also hold "We shall not have a bad year" concurrently, since *x* meaning *p*, in this natural way, actually entails *p*. I don't think Grice is as puzzled by the function of meaning in this natural case and he spends less time here in the paper. It is instead nonnatural meaning, where one can entertain "*x* meant that *p*" and yet also that *p* is false, where Grice seeks to resolve a puzzle. He does so by reducing the facts about speaker *A*'s (nonnatural) meaning to their beliefs and their intentions for communicating with utterance *x* as they do.

I read Grice as taking interpersonal, transactional communication as the dominant paradigm for testing his theory of meaning. I like this paradigm; it feels more honest than abstract justifications of theory, like Russell's notationally-burdened justification or Putnam's far-fetched thought experiments. I think an analysis of language holding itself up to these scenarios first might arrive at a more intuitive picture, but that's just a first impression.