#PHIL181 #Stanford #Stanford-Fall-2021 #philosophy #philosophy-of-language #reading-notes #reading-reaction
2021-09-28
___
For my second reading reaction to Frege I will try to distill what I understand to be the difference between the Object and *Begriffsschrift* models of identity statements, as well as a worry for the *Begriffsschrift* model.

Under the Object model, names contribute the objects they stand for as their content. Thus "$A = B$" expresses the idea that the two nominata (the objects picked out by $A$ and $B$) are actually the same thing. This is a statement of numerical or *quantitative* identity. At the level of *content*, then, "$A = B$" (if true) *means* the same thing as "$A = A$", since both $A$ and $B$ contribute the same actual object as their content. An issue with this conception, one that Frege takes as motivation for his *Begriffsschrift* model, is the fact that statements like "$A = B$" contribute genuine knowledge about the world and often cannot be justified *a priori*. Since "$A = A$" is analytic -- true in virtue of meaning -- and able to be justified *a priori*, the idea that "$A = B$" contributes the same content is absurd. In Frege's own words, ""a=a" and "a = b" are sentences of obviously different cognitive significance" ("On Sense and Nominatum", 186).

The alternative view, one that Frege endorses in the *Begriffsschrift*, is that the "=" or "Sameness" relation concerns the names or signs of objects *themselves*. With Sameness we make an exception to the typical way we handle relations between objects -- in this case, the names express or stand for *themselves*, rather than their nominata. For the statement "$A = B$," then, we have $A$ standing for '$A$' and $B$ standing for '$B$.' So, what is really being said by the Sameness relation here is that "the names '$A$' and '$B$' *corefer* to the same object" -- *not* "the object referred to by $A$ and the object referred to by $B$ are the same," which was our content under the Object view. In this way, we can see how learning of the coreference of $A$ and $B$ can be a nontrivial (and not just linguistic) sort of learning.

One issue I foresee with the *Begriffsschrift* model concerns the plurality of signs for an object that might express the same content. A simple example is translations. Since the names express *their own selves* when determining the contents of a sentence, under this model, translations of sentences will have different contents. So "$A = B$" expresses some content, but the same sentence translated into Spanish, "$Spanish(A) = Spanish(B)$," will have different content, because $A$ stands for '$A$' and $Spanish(A)$ stands for '$Spanish(A)$' and these two signs are (spelled, pronounced, etc.) different. Similarly, "Hesperus is Phosphorus" and "The evening star is the morning star" have different content. This seems problematic, because the *astronomical fact* that we're getting at seems to be identical for each sentence, and likewise were we to translate the fact into ancient Babylonian.